But she ignores him utterly,
Whatever he does, he might be a ghost.
At home she receives him easily,
Among guests she gives him two words at most,
At times a distant bow she proffers,
At others she regards him not a whit;
She has no trace of flirtatiousness,
(Society does not approve of it).
Onegin starts to pale; he suffers;
She does not see, she does not care;
He pines, he withers, he flags, he falters,
He begins to fade consumptively.
All recommend him to the doctors
And they in chorus prescribe the waters.
But he does not leave; he prefers to go
To his forbears by making a swift appointment;
But Tatyana ignores this acting too
(For the sex is strangely petulant);
But he is stubborn and will not back off,
He hopes, and fires up his indignation;
Being ill he is foolish and rashly rough,
And with a feverish hand he pens
To the princess, a passionate declaration.
Although in general he saw no sense
In writing epistles, and why should he?
But his heartfelt anguish evidently
Had now grown quite beyond description.
Here is the letter, an exact transcription.
I foresee all: how the revelation
Of my sad secret will cause offence.
For what a bitter condemnation
Is revealed within your haughty glance!
What do I wish for? And with what aim
Do I open up my soul to you?
And to your spiteful mocking laughter
Perhaps giving cause I'll rue hereafter.
In the past having met you quite by chance,
Seeing in you that spark of tenderness
I did not dare to entrust myself
To it, and shrugged off the sweet romance;
Besides, my repellent liberty
I did not wish then to abandon.
And yet another thing came to part us...
A most stupid sacrifice, poor Lensky ...
From all things that to my heart were dear,
I then had wrenched my heart away;
A stranger to all, bound to no one,
I thought to myself: freedom and rest
Are better than all that happiness.
My God! My God! How was I mistaken!
And how has the heart within me been stricken!
No, no! Each minute to have a glimpse
Of you, to follow you everywhere,
To catch with my adoring eyes,
The smile of your mouth, your looks, your hair;
Only to listen to you, and to understand
In my very soul your complete perfection,
Before you to suffer my crucifixion,
To grow pale, and perish... Ah, that is bliss!
But that is denied me: only for you,
I drag myself hopefully everywhere;
The day is precious, and the hour too,
But I waste in boredom's cruel vanity
The days which by fate are allotted me.
They are such a weary misery!
I know that my days are numbered already,
But in order to give them some small scope
I must in the morning be assured
Of seeing you each day, and of having your word...
I fear that this my humble prayer
By your fierce eye may be construed
As but a cunning trick to lure
You, and I hear your angry sneer.
But if you knew, how terrible
Is the torture of love's rabidness,
To burn ― and yet with reason's curb
To staunch the blood-letting in the soul;
To wish to fall and embrace your knees,
And sobbing, head upon your feet,
To pour forth prayers, confessions, pleas,
All, all, that words can yet control,
Although meanwhile with pretended coldness
To fortify ones looks and speech,
To hold a reasonable conversation,
And look on you with suppressed elation!...
Yet so be it: no longer have I
The strength to fight against this foe;
The die is cast, I am at your mercy,
I submit to my fate, be it yes or no.
There is no reply. He composes another.
To a second and yet to a third letter
Still no reply. He goes to a soirée,
She is there. As the room he enters freely
She walks towards him, and so fiercely!
She ignores his presence, no word is spoken,
Alas! How is she now fortified
With the deepest winter's cold and pride!
She scarce holds back the indignation
Behind her lips' enforced compression!
Onegin devours her with his looks:
Where, where is compassion, where confusion?
Where a trace of tears? .. No stain, no sign!
In her face only the remnants of anger shine.
And perhaps there was a secret fear
That her husband or the world would guess
Her foolish folly or her past tenderness...
All that Onegin knew of her.
There was no hope. He leaves the gathering
Cursing his hopeless lunacy,
And plunging more deeply into madness
He renounces the world and its society.
Then locking himself in his silent study
He remembers the time, not so long since,
When cruel depression and bitterness
Had pursued him through the world's noisiness,
Had caught him and dragged him by the collar,
And shut him away in the darkest corner.
He started to read without much thought.
He got through Gibbon and Rousseau,
Manzoni, Herder and Chamfort,
De Staël and Bichat and Tissot,
The sceptic Bayle he read also,
And all the works of Fontenelle,
And of Russians many whom we know,
Not one rejecting - all were well.
He read the periodicals and journals
Which tell us how we ought to think,
But now they tell me my work stinks,
Although in the past some madrigals
Of criticism would come my way:
E sempre bene, as they say.
What then? It was the usual tale.
His eyes were reading but his mind
Strayed far; dreams, wishes, melancholy,
Crowded into his wandering brain.
Between the rows of printed lines
He read with spiritual eyes
Alien meanings. And in them he
Was plunged in complete reverie.
Secret traditions, half-lost memories
Of passionate gloomy histories,
And totally disconnected dreams,
Threats, explanations, premonitions,
Or from a long tale some lively nonsense,
Or a young maiden's letter's innocence.
Horses? Reader, you have guessed it
Already, and it is as you conjecture.
He hastens to her, to his Tatyana,
This incorrigible freak and romancer.
He enters like one already dead,
There is not a soul in the entrance hall.
To the next room. Further. But ahead all
Is empty. He opens a door. What's this?
He stands on the edge of a precipice.
The princess is before him and alone,
Sitting, in simple clothes, and pale,
Some letter she is reading, silently,
And the tears fall from her eyes in streams;
While her cheek upon her hand she leans.
